I'm recording this after 2 a.m. so I
start with my usual caveat if I look
exhausted it's because I am exhausted
probably some of the best and some of
the worst videos on this channel were
recorded when I was having difficulty
falling asleep decided to record a video
rather than trying to force myself to
study Chinese or something in my
sleep-deprived state so hopefully you
guys get something out of this I
definitely wouldn't record a video on
this topic under other circumstances the
philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer set down
a dictum we might say he sat down a
warning that an abstraction always by
definition contains less information
than the things it is abstracted from
now it's almost ironic that I'm opening
this video but quoting Arthur
Schopenhauer because Schopenhauer was an
avid proponent of the pseudo
philosophical view called determinism
and in this video I'm refuting or
opposing determinism there are many
strange ironies that arise from this
conversation because I do regard the
deterministic view as a religious
worldview as a belief in something
supernatural of insisting on adding
something unseen unscientific and that
cannot be tested or verified to our
empirical experience even though it is
in many ways contradicted by empirical
experience so let's become quickly to
the core question of what determinism is
what it must mean in order to be a
meaningful concept because a great deal
of moving of the goalposts a great deal
of fallacious reasoning is used by the
other side by the pro determinists where
they want to keep subtracting and
subtracting from the definition of
determinism until it means practically
nothing at all
until it simply becomes a description of
reality that's interchangeable with any
reality and anyone else's view of
reality
this is somewhat similar to a Christian
who may be willing to accept any
definition of the soul as long as you
accept that there is such a thing as the
soul that exists so that ultimately if
we simply define the soul as the beating
heart or the spleen or some other organ
in the body they'll say yes yes that's
the soul now you have to believe that
there is such a thing as a soul that
exists in order to refute this we have
to set down what are the in electable
aspects of the soul that make it a soul
rather than merely a description of
oneself one's body or a particular body
part like the heart of a spleen does the
soul denote something that contains your
personal identity prior to your birth
and that continues to survive your body
after death definitely in a religion or
religion like Christianity there's the
very clear notion that the soul is a
container for your identity or is the
very substance of your identity that
endures after your body has died so
obviously this is not true of the heart
or the spleen so we have to reject this
idea that the concept of soul is merely
a description of a living being or of
the person's essence or personality or
character in that context of a
philosophical debate meanwhile of course
in a great deal of poetry and literature
including poetry within the Bible very
often the word soul is used simply as a
description of a person of their spirit
or character so this is the way in which
these concepts become slippery and we
have to avoid whether or not cynically
moving the goalposts we have to avoid
allowing a fallacy of moving the
goalposts as these things progress if
you believe in determinism then you
believe there is no difference between
the dilation of the eye and any other
action of my mind or body
the dilation of the I being the
involuntary adjustment of the eye to
bright light or to darkness so if I walk
into a room that's dark but most you'll
know this already there's an adjustment
in the eye that allows me to see better
in the dark
and then if I step from that dark room
it takes a few seconds of course to
transpire if I step from that dark room
into a very brightly lit room let's say
I step out from the darkness into the
brilliant sunshine in the middle of the
day then I'll be dazed I'll be
temporarily blinded there'll be too much
light for my eye and for several seconds
and won't be able to see clearly
until my eye adjusts so in English this
is called the dilation of the eye
narrowing and expanding how much light
is led into the eye why is it not
possible for me to stand inside the dark
room and decide Oh in a future in the
next few minutes in the next few seconds
I'm going to step out into the bright
light therefore in advance in
preparation I'm now going to adjust my
eye I'm going to dilate my eye so that I
can step out from the darkness into the
bright light without being dazed without
being blinded without being momentarily
in painting or inconvenience why is that
impossible but more fundamentally why is
there an empirically obvious contrast
that I'm aware of between what I can and
cannot decide now the selection of
examples that determine us use to try to
flatter their case does not contain any
contrast such as this they like to speak
in terms of cause and effect and they
like to speak about this abstraction the
abstract idea of cause and effect as if
it is more real than anything
empirically given
and it's not it's an ideal it's an
abstraction it's a ghost made up in your
own head in your own minds i in your own
imagination and it is simply pathetic
for me to hear or determine us tell me
that I'm the one who believes in
something magical and supernatural no no
no determinists believe in the will of
God they've simply removed the figure of
God and still believe in his will
determining what happens in the universe
if you don't believe in some kind of
super supernal supernatural agency what
is it that you believe distinguishes the
empirically obvious experience of the
dilation of my eye from my own so to
speak freewill in thinking about what
I'm going to do tomorrow and I can
insert several other contrasts between
different modes of consciousness that we
all experience empirically and none of
which can be neatly explained in terms
of cause and effect so is the contrast
between the dilation of my eye something
I can't controls and that's involuntary
and the range of all the decisions I
empirically experience that are or
voluntary there is also the difference
between decisions I make in the present
moment and options I consider when
thinking in an abstract way about what I
might do in the future and then there's
a contrast between the mind when I'm
awake and the mind when I'm asleep and
dreaming or when I'm passing from being
awake to being asleep when I'm an
intermediate State memory operates
differently when I'm awake and when I'm
asleep thinking about possibilities for
the future operates differently when I'm
awake I'm being asleep and this form of
reference to past and future is also
somewhat different in how I operate my
hand as opposed to how I operate the
dilation of my
so all of that is completely empirically
obvious and the dilation of the I
dreaming etc they're interesting
examples where we can talk about
something hypothetically which is
nevertheless completely empirical it's
completely based in reality as you can
perceive it for yourself
these abstract concepts like cause and
effect are not truly empirical they're
abstractions which as Schopenhauer warns
us means that they contain less
information than the reality that
they're abstracted from now when I last
debated this with people who really
believed in determinism what they
insisted was that there was no
difference between a human being and a
computer playing chess this would be
very similar to someone insisting to you
there was no difference between a person
and a painting of a person it's true
that if you look at a painting from a
certain angle in a certain light a
painting may have a remarkable
resemblance to a real human being but if
we just turn the painting sideways if we
look at it from its edge we'll be very
quickly revealed to us that there is no
real meaningful resemblance between a
piece of canvas with a very thin layer
of colored paint on it and the
biological mechanical and psychological
reality of a human being likewise a
computer can perform certain functions
like playing the game of chess when it
has been programmed to perform those
functions but the reality of what the
computer is if you turn it sideways and
look at its edge well it includes
mechanisms such as a hard drive a hard
drive is also known as a hard disk hard
disks today technologically are
manufactured in different ways but one
form of a hard drive is literally a
spinning disk
it's a disk that turns
and there's a magnetic needle that
measures that reacts to in effect like
iron filings not quite accurate but
anyway magnetic markings that are on
that disk it's not so different from
playing a CD a compact disc fewer and
fewer people use that kind of technology
today it's not that different from a
record player a vinyl record a
technology maybe nobody has seen today
the point being that even though a
computer can mimic certain kinds of
human reasoning when human beings have
trained it and programmed it to mimic
that reasoning although a painting can
mimic the appearance of a human being
when human beings have if you like
trained a piece of canvas trained paint
on canvas prepare instructed and formed
the canvas to have this resemblance the
resemblance is misleading and incredibly
shallow and to take one seriously as an
allegory or explanation for another is
fundamentally absurd in the same mode
that a great deal of religious thinking
is fundamentally observed it's insisting
that an abstraction is somehow more real
than the things being abstracted from
now when I debated this with real-life
determinists they insisted that the
computer that plays chess has everything
in common with a human mind because they
claimed that this disk this plastic disc
with metal needle reading instructions
and computer code and performing the act
of playing chess that this was itself
literally the product of evolution I
remember in the conversation I said are
you sure you really mean the word
literally when you say that this
computer program is produced by
evolution do you not think it would be
more honest for you to say figuratively
or abstract lis it's produced by
evolution and they were referring to
certain types of procedure in computer
programming normal people say
procedurally generated where you
human being sets up a program to to some
extent invent explore different
possibilities sift them figure out which
ones are more effective reject
strategies that don't work and use
strategies that do this kind of thing
it's still computer programming guys
it's still coding it's not evolution and
of course again this is like the
comparison of the painting I was trying
to use Socratic method and get the other
person to consider this in what ways is
a computer playing chess similar to and
dissimilar from biological evolution
well there's no natural selection
there's no meat selection right this is
one of the most fundamental elements
evolution there's no predation there's
no disease now again we could go on and
on we could try to make a list of all
the essential defining characteristics
that mark something as evolution or a
product of evolution and how those
things relate to the functioning of the
mind including you know distinctive
elements of how consciousness operates
like sleep and the contrast we have
between the sleeping mind and the waking
mind the contrast we have between the
the mechanism of your eye adjusting to
light in darkness and things like your
hand that you can decide to control and
the other side was not able to engage in
this kind of discourse at all they got
angry at me and showed it at me so sue
Crowe this is one of the problems the
Socratic method it takes two to tango
the other side needs to be willing to
really entertain those questions and to
explore the definitions of terms that
they rely on which definitely in this
case includes the definition of
determinism itself the last refuge of
the determinants is to try to retreat
behind this excuse the determinism is
merely an explanation for reality as we
already experienced it that adds nothing
to that reality and subtracts nothing to
it which is again like a Christian
telling you that the soul is merely a
description of your heart or spleen your
organs that it therefore can't be
refuted and this is again a clewd the
fact that we're into the religious
mentality precisely because you set up
an idea like this
with the claim that there is no possible
evidence that can refute it
so it's both the case that there is no
empirical reality for this notion of a
magical force that determines my choices
that in fact makes all of my choices and
actions in a voluntary in the same way
that the dilation of my eye is
involuntary there is nothing I can see
or measure that actually determines
these things but there's also nothing
hypothetically possible that ever can be
experienced that would refute it this
comes back to Karl poppers definition of
falsification if you can't at least
hypothetically come up with some form of
evidence of experience that would
falsify your idea then it's not
scientific it's in the world of religion
and dogma and it's very significant to
point out that Karl Popper used this
theory primarily to criticize psychology
and psychotherapy psychological theories
in his time he was very concerned with
the way that for example Freudianism
seemed to propose ideas that were
religious in nature and that were
impossible to really debate dispute
debunk there was no there weren't
susceptible to evidence they weren't
based on evidence and they also couldn't
be refuted by evidence and on the
contrary we have to structure ideas in
such a way where we say well look maybe
you could convince me that you know my
control over my hand really is as
involuntary as the dilation of my eye
maybe you could convince me that there
is this empirically real thing that you
call the chain of causation of cause and
effect but from where I'm sitting the
empirical reality that we depart from
these debates is indeed that whereas the
dilation of my eye responds to the
presence an absence of light in a
cause-and-effect manner that that
description applies in that case that
does not apply very well to me and my
reverie whether I'm waking or asleep
coming up with ideas about what I'm
going to do in the future ex nihilo
while I'm while I'm awake just engaging
in speculative thought or
I'm lying down half-asleep and sound
asleep thinking about what I might do in
the future what I'm doing at that time
empirically is very very different from
what a computer is doing when it plays a
game of chess by reading the instruction
set with a metal needle written down and
already written down set of instructions
playing off of a disk just as what I'm
doing in thinking is very different from
a painting of a man sitting deep in
thought